So, I've been thinking lately about spacebattles. Not the webforum named spacebattles, but the idea of manmade vessels fighting each other in space. I'm planning to run a campaign or quest based around a combat spacecraft and have been tinkering with the idea. Part of the inspiration has been my recent gaming: I've been playing a strategy game called [Stellaris](https://www.paradoxplaza.com/stellaris) that is set in space. This strategy game has combat between fleets, and as common in science fiction, it's handled all wrong.

How, you ask? Let's explore!

###Problems with space battles as depicted

Well, basically, our combat comes down to a problem of pyhysics and velocity warring with our romantic sense of what we want out of space battles. People like to read about WWII or Age of Sail type battles, with big capital ships pulling up alongisde each other at low speeds and duking it out with broadsides of short-range weapons. Perhaps there will be fighters (like in WWII) or boarding actions (as you'd see earlier). Heroic captains would pull stunts to get on the "tail" of their enemies and defeat them with careful positioning. 

In fact, this is not at all how space battles with advanced technology would work. This isn't even how modern naval battles work today. A naval confrontation today involves ships shooting missiles at each other from over the horizon, or launching aircraft that shoot missiles from similar distances. There are no broadsides or boarding actions. This only gets more pronounced if you put everyone in space. In space, there is no drag, so there's no top speed for something like a missile. Even without a warhead, a missile can strike an enemy ship (or planet!) from beyond visual range at relatvistic speeds.

Right now, today, we can and have fired rockets from the surface of Earth to strike a target on the surface of Mars with an accuracy of within 200 meters. This is a lot more impressive than it sounds, since the rocket had to exit one gravity well and enter another, dealing with atmosphere on both sides. We can expect future space weaponry to only be more accurate, with missiles flying across hundreds of thousands or millions of miles to strike their enemies at incredible velocities.

Missiles would not necessarily need a warhead, since they would have so much kinetic energy, but besides the standard nuclear payload, you might have a missile that carried a weapon (such as lasers or EWAR) in the way a fighter does today. Missiles would be basically unavoidable due to the high acceleration they could pull; whereas humans can't survive many Gs of acceleration, missiles could be engineered to handle it.

### What space battles would probably look like

With no real top speed (except c) on missiles and ships, it's really hard to imagine close quarters combat. It would look like a joust, basically, albeit one at relative speed where nobody passes within 10,000km of each other. Two ships identify each other from opposite ends of a star system. depending on the quality of their drive systems, they accelerate towards each other or a common objective. At some point, hundreds of thousands or millions of miles away from each other, they enter combat range and launch missiles. The missiles streak across the void between the ships, with multiple volleys being launched before the first one hits. Missiles hit, striking or destroying one or both ships. The ships then shoot past each other at relativistic speed and barring particular angles (like one chasing another) don't fight each other for quite some time. Turing around or slowing down takes as much time as accelerating does in space! Both ships being incapacitated/destroyed will be a common outcome here. 

###Honorverse, a series with accurate space battles

Interestingly, there actually are sci-fi novels that depict space battles fairly accurately. A classic example is the Honorverse novels. Although I consider the Honorverse novels to be a bit of a guilty pleasure, David Weber basically nails how space combat works and actually makes it interesting. Most battles take place at a distance of like 100+ thousand kilometers, and revolve around missiles and anti-missile systems. The science fictiony part of the technology (reactionless drives, FTL travel, etc) have their logical consequences explored so that combat makes sense. For example, missiles are fitted with smaller versions of the reactionless drives that are on space battleships, and are very hard to avoid due to their speed.

The technology is clever. The drive systems of the spaceships have generate force fields, as well as a pair of strong force field plates that can't be placed in front of them, but only "above" and "below" the axis of acceleration. FTL travel is only possible pretty far out, several dozen or perhaps nearly a hundred AU from the star. FTL travel is not instantaneous, and it takes several days to pass between adjacent systems. The same system that provides reactionless in-system acceleration is also an FTL drive and provides "inertial stabilization" allowing the spacecraft to accelerate at hundreds of Gs without destroying the humans or structures inside it.

If you're going to do spacebattles, this seems like the way to do it. If you want to read honorverse works, I'd start with *Shadow of Saganami* since that one stands alone and is a personal favorite (and lacks a certain character who gets boring over time).

###What I'm trying to do

I want to *not* do what David Weber did with Honorverse. He took what we know about physics and derived a pretty realistic style of space combat from that, which is cool, but not my goal. I want to put together a set of technologies or changes to physics that give us space battles like we see in Master of Orion, or Stellaris, or any of a variety of space fiction depictions. Ideally, I'd like to, from a list of specific technologies (shield generators, FTL, etc) make it so WWII style naval battles are the only real way to fight in space. This is a big challenge, since it's already true that WWII naval battles are not effective, and people always want to be accelerating. 

The main problem to address here is engagement range. As long as battles are happening from outside of visual range, they're boring. Star Wars understood this; for some reason all the spacecraft are always right on top of each other. Does this make sense? Maybe not. But it's sweet. I dont' want to hand-wave away all that stuff though, I want it to make sense. 

###The space magic / tech system thing

So, here is the mix of techs I think will fix the problem of "relativitic missile jousting is the best strat" that realistic space battles face. Please let me know if there are flaws here! I want this to stand up the the scrutiny of power gamers trying to optimize their ship and characters in the setting, so it must at least pass casual inxpection

**Grav Drive: L-FTL and S-FTL**: There are two usages of FTL, both generated by the same "grav drive" technology. L-FTL can be used to travel long distances between star systems, but this can't be done within like 100 AU of a star. S-FTL can be used for in-system travel, but can be interdicted easily by someone who is close, so it is difficult to escape using it. Neither L-FTL nor S-FTL grants you velocity; after the FTL sequence ends (duration higher for longer distances), you're dumped out at low speed. Grav drives are very large and expensive.

**Grav Drive: Inertial Control**: The Grav drive also works as a reactionless drive that converts energy directly into inertia/momentum. It can be used to accelerate or brake. It also allows for artificial gravity inside the ship, so the ship and its inhabitants are always under one earth gravity. The same technology that allows for the bending of space to jump to warp allows for power plant output to be converted directly to a change in speed via some kind of "gravity" technology that isn't fully explained but must be accepted as a premise of the campaign.

**Grav Drive: Interfering Grav Shield**: The Inertial Drive also generates a "gravity bubble" passively around the ship if it's not actively entering or existing an FTL jump. This bubble, called a Grav Shield is very sturdy and prevents almost all weapons from dealing damage. It is significantly weaker if in a deep gravity well (such as on the surface of a planet), or when close to (within 100km of) another Grav Shield. It also produces an S-FTL interdiction effect at this range. One common strategy is for smaller ships to power down their grav drives so they can stay close to the large ships without interference at range (probably inside the larger ship's Grav Shields). Once they close to combat distance with the enemies, the smaller ships power up their own Grav Shields, since interference will be happening anyways.

This doesn't solve the top speed problem like they do in Eve (by giving ships drag/friction in space, ew), but I think it removes most of the need for ships to move at relativistic speeds. To actually defeat an enemy vessel, you need to close the distance between the ships until they are close. Once they are in attack distance the Grav Shields interfere and become weak enough to penetrate. This is easily doable with S-FTL. Once they are at close range, S-FTL is interdicted by the Grav Shield interference, the enemy can't simply warp away every time you engage them in battle. Long range missiles on their own don't work well because outside of very close range, ships shields are hard to destroy. This might create a dynamic where some ships hang back and shoot missiles, while some ships go in to disrupt the shields of the enemy, but this could actually add to the fun. 

So, the goal would be to have these be the FTL/gravity/shield tech in the RPG campaign, and to have this tech/magic system promote what we think of as romantic space battles, with fighters and close range combat etc. This particular set of rules that I worked back to starting from a final result of "WWII style naval battles in space" and has gone through a couple iterations of "wow, here's an obvious problem, how do we patch this" which is why it seems a bit patchy and weird. Hopefully it doesn't seem too obvious that the rules are a direct result of trying to reach a traditional spacebattle result.

A reference essay on realistic space battles [(link)](https://forums.spacebattles.com/threads/essay-on-realistic-space-combat-i-wrote.131056/)

 
